Author:  Allan John Ropski
Date: 	 2017/10/31
Project: Tempus Coding Challenge

		
Table of Contents
  Intro
  Process
  Usage
  Version details
				
		
--------------
--- HELLO! ---
--------------

This submission includes of a set of programs designed to annotate a vcf file 
with details for the most severe alternate allele, and two output files. This 
document contains usage for running the programs and what they do. Everything 
was done locally and GRCh37.75/hg19 were used for genome references. Version
details for R and Ensembl are shown at bottom.


---------------
--- PROCESS ---
---------------

The challenge provided a vcf file referenced to human_g1k_v37.fasta, and is
unphased. The Ensembl VEP program was utilized to add annotations in the 'ANN' 
slot, selecting the most severe based on Sequence Ontology (SO). Importantly, 
the --allele_number option specifies which was selected based on the (SO) 
severity rank criteria. This first call also adds in 'GENE_PHENO' which 
identifies hits to a variety of other sources, notably Cancer Gene Census. An 
additional .html summary is also provided with VEP, logging the command line
arugments, and presenting both tabular and graphical references.

After adding annotations, the computation for count data was performed in R. 
This also facilitated the addition of these values into the vcf data. Because 
multiple alternates are present, 2 functions were created to extract the 
allele-specific count data; referenced by the ALLELE_NUM field. This was then 
used to create new variables prepended with "ALT_" for depth, count, and 
frequency. 

Next, ExAC annotations for allele frequency and RSID were queried through the
bulk API feature at "http://exac.hms.harvard.edu/". The ID used is the same
as the vcf identifier, with hyphens replacing other special characters. The 
request is not returned in the same order as supplied, so a match is done to 
align with vcf file.

Lastly, a text-friendly table was created with minimal details, mainly those 
in request. Each row is ID'd by the string 'CHROM_POS_REF/ALT' and is tab-
delimited in the 'final_Challenge_data.txt' file.


-------------
--- USAGE ---
-------------

As everything was processed locally, the --cache --offline --assembly options 
in Makefile require GRCh37/hg19 reference files, likewise for R.

There are 3 program files included in submission:
  (1) Makefile
    This file is simply used to manage the series of calls to Ensembl's VEP 
	and the R script master.r explained below.	
	
	The first commented line in file shows intended usage:		
	make -f Makefile variant_output_effect_pick.vcf Challenge_data_ExAC.vcf \
	  Challenge_data_final.vcf		
	
	If other genome builds are required, update:
	  --assembly GRCh37
	  --plugin ExAC.0.3.GRCh37.vcf.gz	
	
	VEP options are documented here:
	https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/script/vep_options.html
		
  (2) master_func.r
	Sourced by master.r. Contains functions for extracting fields, and the rank
	of Sequence Ontology terms, though this ranking is not used. These terms 
	used by VEP are in conjunction with --pick_order and stored as SO_term_rank.
	
	get_ALT_INFO_value: function that extracts INFO values considering when 
	  multiple exist, returning the ALLELE_NUM index (vep --allele_number).
	
	get_field: function that extracts fields listed in the INFO header by name
	
	get_ExAC: posts variant IDs from vcf to ExAC API; converts from vcf format
	
	get_ExAC_field: function for preventing NULL values for missing ExAC annotations
	
	
  (3) master.r
    Requires:
	  package VariantAnnotation
	  pacakge GenomicRanges
	  master_func.r 
	  
	This program reads in the output vcf file from Ensembl VEP, adds new 
	annotations via ExAC API, extracts read count details for the picked variant,
	and outputs a complete vcf along with a table containing basic details.
	  
	The Makefile call has two required arguments (no set defaults), as shown 
	in first two commented rows in file:
	
	#Rscript master.r variant_output_effect_pick.vcf hg19 
	  args[1] names the annotated vcf from 2 Ensembl runs; 
	  args[2] names the genome build
	
	If other genome builds are required, update 'hg19' and review package
	requirements.


----------------------------------------
--- ENSEMBL VARIANT EFFECT PREDICTOR ---
----------------------------------------

	Versions:
	  ensembl              : 90.4a44397
	  ensembl-funcgen      : 90.743f32b
	  ensembl-io           : 90.9a148ea
	  ensembl-variation    : 90.58bf949
	  ensembl-vep          : 90.6
	  
	
---------------------
--- R sessionInfo ---
---------------------

	R version 3.4.2 (2017-09-28)
	Platform: x86_64-pc-linux-gnu (64-bit)
	Running under: Ubuntu 16.04.3 LTS

	Matrix products: default
	BLAS: /usr/lib/libblas/libblas.so.3.6.0
	LAPACK: /usr/lib/lapack/liblapack.so.3.6.0

	locale:
	 [1] LC_CTYPE=en_US.UTF-8       LC_NUMERIC=C              
	 [3] LC_TIME=en_US.UTF-8        LC_COLLATE=en_US.UTF-8    
	 [5] LC_MONETARY=en_US.UTF-8    LC_MESSAGES=en_US.UTF-8   
	 [7] LC_PAPER=en_US.UTF-8       LC_NAME=C                 
	 [9] LC_ADDRESS=C               LC_TELEPHONE=C            
	[11] LC_MEASUREMENT=en_US.UTF-8 LC_IDENTIFICATION=C       

	attached base packages:
	[1] stats4    parallel  stats     graphics  grDevices utils     datasets 
	[8] methods   base     

	other attached packages:
	 [1] VariantAnnotation_1.22.3   Rsamtools_1.28.0          
	 [3] Biostrings_2.44.2          XVector_0.16.0            
	 [5] SummarizedExperiment_1.6.5 DelayedArray_0.2.7        
	 [7] matrixStats_0.52.2         Biobase_2.36.2            
	 [9] GenomicRanges_1.28.6       GenomeInfoDb_1.12.3       
	[11] IRanges_2.10.5             S4Vectors_0.14.7          
	[13] BiocGenerics_0.22.1       

	loaded via a namespace (and not attached):
	 [1] Rcpp_0.12.13             compiler_3.4.2           GenomicFeatures_1.28.5  
	 [4] bitops_1.0-6             tools_3.4.2              zlibbioc_1.22.0         
	 [7] biomaRt_2.32.1           digest_0.6.12            bit_1.1-12              
	[10] RSQLite_2.0              memoise_1.1.0            tibble_1.3.4            
	[13] lattice_0.20-35          BSgenome_1.44.2          rlang_0.1.2             
	[16] Matrix_1.2-11            DBI_0.7                  GenomeInfoDbData_0.99.0 
	[19] rtracklayer_1.36.6       bit64_0.9-7              grid_3.4.2              
	[22] AnnotationDbi_1.38.2     XML_3.98-1.9             BiocParallel_1.10.1     
	[25] blob_1.1.0               GenomicAlignments_1.12.2 RCurl_1.95-4.8
